perhaps the episode that has incensed
the most people was the American role in
the overthrow of the socialist
government of Chile's President Allende
in 1973 the report says there is no
doubt that President Nixon wanted to top
all the end a government and there is no
doubt he supported our efforts in Chile
to drive a yen day from office one of
the victims of these efforts was General
Rene Schneider the army chief of staff
in Chile Snyder strongly believed in
constitutional government and at the
same time strongly opposed military coos
he was considered a major obstacle and
attempts to I'll stay on day but he was
killed in a kidnap attempt in 1970 in an
action that raised many questions about
the American role in Chile now let's
review the five cases covered in the
committee's report released today they
involved Congo leader Patrice Lumumba
South Vietnamese president Jim the
dictator of the Dominican Republic
Rafael Trujillo Army General Rene
Schneider of Chile and Fidel Castro of
Cuba Castro was viewed as a diplomatic
thorn in the side of America from the
moment he took power in 1959 US
officials feared the establishment of a
Russian outpost in our backyard and
immediately mobilized to curb Castro's
power to quarantine Cuba and as the
report tells us in rather elaborate
detail to do a great deal more Fidel
Castro we have found concrete evidence
of at least eight plots involving CIA to
assassinate Fidel Castro from 1960 to
1965 although some of the plots did not
advance beyond the stage of planning and
preparation one plot involving the use
of underworld figures reportedly twice
progressed to the point of sending
poison pills to Cuba and dispatching
teams to commit the deed another plot
involved furnishing weapons and other
assassination devices to a Cuban
dissident the proposed assassination
devices ran the gamut from high-powered
rifles to poison pills poison pens
deadly bacterial powders and other
materials which strain the imagination
the most ironic of these plots took
place on November 22nd 1963
the very day President Kennedy was shot
in Dallas when a CIA official offered a
poison pen to a Cuban for use against
Castro while at the same time an
emissary from President Kennedy was
meeting with Castro to explore the
possibility of improved relations
operation Mongoose in November 1962
President Kennedy issued a memorandum
recording his decision to begin the
Mongoose project to use our available
assets to help Cuba overthrow the
communist regime the ultimate objective
of mongoose was to have the people
themselves overthrow the Castro regime
rather than us engineered efforts from
outside Cuba
although the collection of intelligence
information was a central objective of
Mongoose until August 1962 sabotage and
paramilitary actions were also conducted
including a major sabotage operation
aimed at a large Cuban copper mine the
efforts to assassinate Castro took place
in an atmosphere of extreme pressure by
Eisenhower and Kennedy administration
officials to discredit and overthrow the
Castro regime
shortly after Castro's ascendancy to
power Allen Dulles directed that
thorough consideration be given to the
elimination of Castro but there was
insufficient evidence from which the
committee could conclude that President
Eisenhower Kennedy or Johnson their
close advisers or a special group
authorized any assassination there's
evidence that during the Cuban Missile
Crisis when when our government finally
realized that that was at stake that we
tried to call off operatives in Cuba
that may have been trying to get Castro
killed but we had no assurances that we
in fact had reached them or called them
all so that you set in motion things
which may be horrible and concept but
may be unbelievable when it finally
played out to its final conclusion
we both are in Cuba now that these
various plots against Castro have been
officially revealed what do you think
this will do to our efforts to normalize
relations with Cuba Castro was the first
to know of these attempts how long
before the American people the committee
found a certain irony in the fact that a
poison pen device was being passed for
the purpose of assassinating Castro on
the very day that President Kennedy was
assassinated in Dallas